So this is the code for cosine similarity.
Here I have code for the correlation coefficients.
And this should look familiar because it's basically the same as the code above, except I mean center
first.
So I'm not going to run this code cell yet.
First I want to show you the results for cosine similarity.
And then I'm going to go back and run this code which is nearly identical analysis except for the line
where I mean center first.
Uh, and by the way, I still call this variable cosine similarity, but that's just so I don't have
to change the code below.
So a little bit confusing.
I apologize for that.
Anyway, not going to run this code.
Uh, I have run this code.
So we are working with cosine similarity here.
What I'm doing is generating some random, cosine similarity values.
So we have a comparison for the plots.
And I showed the random distribution in the slides, although I didn't really talk about it.
So essentially all I'm doing is taking the activations values completely randomly shuffling them around.
And so that is this randomly shuffling.
So just reordering all of the activations.
So I'm not generating new fake data.
I'm taking all of the real activation data and just shuffling it around.
And then I resort that and then calculate the cosine similarity for the randomized or shuffled matrix.
This is going to be an interesting distribution to compare against the observed cosine similarities.
Okay.
So run that code.
So now we have an issue here which is you know we have this giant matrix.
But we need to separate the vectors for within each matrix versus across the different matrices.
That is to say, we want to examine the cosine similarities between pairs of query vectors and also
between pairs of keys vectors.
And then we want to look at the cosine similarity between pairs of the queries vectors and the keys
vectors.
So how do we isolate those different uh analyzes those different sets of results.
That is what I do here with this mask.
So let me first show you what the mask looks like.
And then I'll scroll back up and show the code.
So I've created this matrix mask here.
It has values of one over here and four over here and nine over here.
And these are the cross terms.
So the idea is that all of these numbers here that have in the mask a numerical value of one, Those
correspond to the cu-cu interactions.
So all possible pairs of all the Q vectors with all the other q vectors.
Here this one is for k, so all the k vectors with other k vectors.
This one up here are the cross terms.
So the q k interactions.
So these are the cosine similarities between all of the q vectors and all of the k vectors.
And then yeah that's for all the three pairs.
So the way that I create this matrix mask is by defining the q to be one, k to be two and v to be three,
and then creating a vector mask which looks like this.
It's just ones and then twos and then threes.
This is a vector.
And then I calculate the outer product of this vector with itself, uh, which would give me a full
version of this matrix.
And then I take the uh so let's see this is the outer product and then I take the upper triangular.
And that gives me just the these parts of the matrix, which are the unique cosine similarity values.
If this looks familiar, this general approach, if this looks familiar, then that's great.
You have actually seen exactly this same approach before.
Earlier in the course when we were separating groups into different semantic categories of different
tokens.
Okay.
So with that in mind, we can now apply blocks of this mask to these data up here to extract and isolate
the cosine similarities within and across the three different submatrices of the attention subblock.
And that is what I start doing down here.
Okay.
So here I get the cosine similarity for the target.
Here I'm looking for where the matrix mask equals the value of schlock times itself.
So this is one times one, which is one.
And then this is two times two, which is four, three times three, which is nine.
So these three rows here are getting all of the values in this triangle for Q and this triangle for
k.
And in this triangle for v okay.
And then I get the cross terms here.
So that is one times two which is a value of two.
So this was one this was two.
And all of the numerical values of two in this mask appear over here.
So that is the interaction between q and v okay.
So that is that.
So yeah this is for the targets.
And then I repeat this down here for the non targets.
So then we see this is vectorized.
So we get lots of data.
It's like half a million data values for QQ Qk.
Cosine similarity for the target value.
And what are all of these numbers?
So we have the q neurons and the k neurons.
And we have their activations for all of the 54 target values.
So then we take each vector in Q with each vector in k calculate their cosine similarities.
And then basically this that just gets vectorized here.
So that's all the numbers that we have over there.
Okay.
So that is for isolating the data.
Here I am generating the histograms.
Here I'm defining the bin boundaries for creating the histograms.
So bins from minus one to plus one.
And I'm defining 101 boundary values.
Which means there's going to be 100 bins between minus one and plus one.
This is averaging together the bin edges so that we get the bin centers.
This is what I'll use for plotting.
Okay.
So because we have the identical bin boundaries, we just we only need the first output here of numpy
histogram.
So you can see it's a lot of code to copy paste.
I sure hope that I didn't make any errors here in copying and pasting, but I think it's all correct.
Okay, so we have for the targets we have the within matrix and between matrix.
For the non targets we have the within matrix and between matrix.
And then we have the random.
That is its own thing down here.
So now we have all of the data.
And now we can generate the plot.
So again the plots are not you know if you take the time to understand one line then you understand
all of the lines.
They all do exactly the same thing.
I guess one thing I will point out here is that the random vectors just ended up having such a different
y axis value compared to all of the other vectors that I just arbitrarily divided by three.
That's just just for visualization.
So in fact, the random, uh, cosine similarity values are really not that interesting.
It just looks like a pure Gaussian centered at zero.
The main point of this is to show that basically none of these results that you see here are really
convincingly random.
So they look really non-random.
That's mainly the whole point of showing this random distribution here.
Otherwise what do we see?
What can we see in this interpretation?
So one thing is if you look just at the targets so that's in the top row.
Is that within a matrix.
So qk and k we see lots of really robust cosine similarities.
So extreme values close to minus one and close to plus one.
And there are of course also a lot of pairs of vectors that have very weak or even no cosine similarity.
But you can see the distributions make this kind of smile.
So it's really pushing out towards the extremes.
Lots of vectors are really strongly uh, have strong cosine similarity within the uh, the V matrix.
It certainly doesn't look random, but you don't see this kind of pull up to the extremes of the distribution.
And what this indicates is that the V matrix is a little bit more decoupled.
So the individual V vectors are coding for different kinds of properties based on the previous context,
whereas the q and the k matrices are doing a lot of coding for the current token, which is identical
in all of these sentences.
Also interesting to look across matrix again, you see, you know, the whole spectrum of cosine similarities
appearing for all three of these pairs of matrices.
But what really stands out is the Q.
So query keys interactions and why are those so much higher.
And the interactions with the the value uh vectors are lower.
Well, one thing to keep in mind is that the purpose of Q and k, the uh, the query and the keys vectors
is to dot product with themselves and determine the probability that their tokens match.
And if there is a good match between the query vectors and the keys vectors, then those corresponding
uh values or v vectors are what carries the information that goes into the adjustment, into the token
embeddings vector into the residual stream, and then passed on to the MLP layer.
So that means that the Q and k matrices are working closely together pre attention and the v vector
the values that is not working as closely with the Q and K compared to what it does on its own.
There is a lot more that could be said and interpreted and speculated about in this graph.
I invite you to think more about that based on what you learned earlier in this course, but I'm going
to move on to some additional explorations.
So one thing is like, why do we get all these really strong negative correlations?
What does that mean and what's going on there?
Is it really the case that one q vector is shooting up while the other one is shooting down, or what's
going on there?
So one thing to remember about cosine similarity is that any mean offsets in the vectors are brought
into the results of cosine similarity.
And so if there are mean offsets those are not subtracted out.
They are with the correlation coefficient.
They are not with the cosine similarity.
So a negative value here could actually indicate that one vector has a lot of negative values, and
another vector has a lot of positive values.
So let's do some additional explorations here.
What I'm doing here is plotting the average value across all 54 target tokens for the queries vectors,
the keys vectors and the values vectors.
Now when you look at the total population level.
So across all of the vectors in these matrices, you do see that the average the layer average basically
collapses to zero.
I didn't actually calculate this.
You could do it if you want, but it certainly looks like it's somewhere around zero.
But there's quite a bit of variability.
So you see that there are average over all 54 tokens.
There are Q vectors that just generally respond in a positive way.
So with positive Of activation every time the word her appears, and others where on average across
the 54 repetitions of the word her.
There is a negative activation value.
You see that for the the queries, it's even more the case.
You get even more extreme values for the keys vectors.
And the values vectors actually seem to be a little bit tighter there, a little bit closer to being
already centered.
So this sort of thing alone, these mean offsets alone, could drive the cosine similarity values towards
the extremes towards plus one.
If you have these two vectors, or like minus one if you have this vector and this vector here, this
difference in variability is something that you are going to explore in the code challenge in the next
video.
So for now this is kind of a curious observation, and we will look at it in more detail uh, in the
next video.
Okay, there's another curious finding that I saw here, which is that when you look at all of the cosine
similarities strung out, so not organized into a matrix, as you see here, uh, here.
Where is it?
It's all the way up here.
Yeah.
Okay.
So here all of the cosine similarities are organized into a matrix, but we can extract these row by
row by row and then plot them as dots in a scatter plot where the x axis would show the individual pairs.
And that's what you see here.
And then, uh, it seems like there are these kind of, uh, short regimes where the cosine similarities
will be fairly extreme.
Not all of them.
There's a mix, but fairly extreme.
And then there's another regime.
So another set of pairs of vectors where the cosine similarity is different and then more extreme.
This is kind of a middle range and so on.
To be honest, I have no idea what is causing this or what it's related to or how to interpret it.
I initially thought it might be related to the different attention heads which are pooled together in
this analysis.
We're not separating this analysis for the different heads, but the different heads are actually considerably
shorter than any of these different regimes.
So it would take a little bit more in-depth investigation to dig into this and figure out what is the
proper way to, uh, to interpret these, but that is beyond my time limit over here.
Okay.
The last thing I want to do is regenerate these plots, but using correlation coefficient instead of
cosine similarity.
So now all I'm going to do is go back and run this code.
Where is it?
This code here.
Okay.
So the variable names are still cosine similarity.
These two lines of code are identical to the lines of code here.
When I actually did calculate cosine similarity.
The difference, as you will remember from earlier in the course between cosine similarity and correlation
coefficient is simply this line here.
So subtracting the mean if the data are already naturally mean centered, or at least very close to
being mean centered, correlation and cosine similarity will be nearly identical.
So let's run this line of code or this code cell.
And now I'm literally just going to rerun all of this.
Not even look at it until the very end.
It's all the same.
We just get a new okay new plot here.
So now we see something really strikingly different.
We see basically that all of the distributions of correlations look quite Gaussian compared to the really
strongly non-Gaussian results that we got for cosine similarity.
And we also don't really see much extreme values anymore.
And finally, we also do not see much differentiation between the different matrices.
That's also really strikingly different.
So a lot of really striking qualitative differences between cosine similarity and correlation analysis,
purely due to subtracting the mean from each vector instead of allowing the mean to be preserved.
And this striking difference indicates that the average offset is a really important coding characteristic
inside these LMS.
So it's not just about coordinated activations across the different k vectors and q vectors and so on.
It's also about their mean offsets.
That is, incorporating some important information about the tokens and the relationship to the preceding
context.
I hope you found this video interesting and thought provoking.
There are lots of patterns happening inside Llms, and the complexity of language and the complexity
of LLM.
The models themselves makes it difficult to have a really precise interpretation right from the get
go, without a lot more time spent on the analysis.
If you are considering going into the field of mech interp, then this should be really exciting because
it means that although the work is challenging, there's so much of this scientific landscape that is
unexplored and undeveloped.
Anyway, the code challenge in the next video follows up directly from the code here, and I'm looking
forward to working through those exercises with you.